---
layout: post
title:  "Exploratory Data Analysis on Pokemon Moves"
author: Brett Pedersen
description: "Creative description"   
image: "/assets/images/blog_image.png"
---

Exploratory data analysis is a critical component of the data science process. It can't be understated just how helpful it is to understand a data set before you dive right into fitting a model. In this blog post, I will be analyzing a data set containing information about every Pokemon move from the mainline games. I will be pointing out interesting details (through tables and graphs) about the variables involved as well as the relationships between them.

# The Data Set

This data set was compiled from the moves endpoint of the [PokeAPI](https://pokeapi.co/docs/v2). There are several move attributes included, but I chose the 9 attributes I found most interesting/important. Here are the first few rows of the data set after pulling all the necessary info from the api and selecting certain columns.

```python
moves[moves["accuracy"].isna()]
```

| name        |   accuracy |   effect_chance |   pp |   priority |   power | damage_class.name   | generation.name   | target.name      | type.name   |
|:------------|-----------:|----------------:|-----:|-----------:|--------:|:--------------------|:------------------|:-----------------|:------------|
|pound        |        100 |             nan |   35 |          0 |      40 | physical            | generation-i      | selected-pokemon | normal      |
|karate-chop  |        100 |             nan |   25 |          0 |      50 | physical            | generation-i      | selected-pokemon | fighting    |
|double-slap  |         85 |             nan |   10 |          0 |      15 | physical            | generation-i      | selected-pokemon | normal      |
|comet-punch  |         85 |             nan |   15 |          0 |      18 | physical            | generation-i      | selected-pokemon | normal      |
|mega-punch   |         85 |             nan |   20 |          0 |      80 | physical            | generation-i      | selected-pokemon | normal      |

There are a total of 919 observations with 5 numerical features and 4 categorical ones. I'll go over each of them briefly.

- name: A unique name for each move, can serve as an id
- accuracy: How likely the move is to make contact with the opponent (the success rate)
- effect_chance: How likely the move is to apply a secondary bonus effect
- pp: How many times the move can be used
- priority: Moves with higher priority will go before moves with lower priority
- power: Determines how much damage the move will do to the opponent
- damage_class.name: Whether the move deals physical damage, special damage, or inflict some kind of status condition
- generation.name: Which generation of games was the move introduced
- target.name: Whether a move targets a single opponent, multiple opponents simultaneously, an ally, or the user
- type.name: What kind of elemental type the move is (grass, fire, water, etc.)

By exploring this data set, I intend to answer the following questions:

- What is the meaning of the missing (nan) values?
- How do these features interact with each other?
- How have moves changed over time?

# Understanding the Missing values

The only features of this data set that contain missing values are accuracy, effect_chance, and power. These values are not listed as NA's due to the data set being incomplete however. Having some prior knowledge about the games can enable one to understand the meaning of the NA's. Let's first look at the accuracy variable.

```python
moves[moves["accuracy"].isna()]
```

By filtering out all the non-missing values, we can see a pattern that most moves with the accuracy missing either target the the user or the field in some way. These are moves that boost the user or change the environment in some way, not ones that throw something at the opponent. With that context, it makes sense why the accuracy isn't given a number. Furthermore, the accuracy being listed as NA actually conveys this information. The exeception to the rule is moves like flower trick, which are attacks that target the opponent, but have perfect accuracy. The difference between perfect accuracy and 100% accuracy requires prior knowledge, but to keep things concise, moves with perfect accuracy won't miss even when the user's accuracy is meddled with.

As for effect_chance, NA's simply mean that the move has no secondary effect. It might make sense to replace these values with 0 with the following code:

```python
moves["effect_chance"].fillna(0)
```

```python
moves[moves["power"].isna()]
```

Lastly, for power, the pattern that jumps out (especially if you've played the games before) is that most moves with missing values are status moves. Since status moves don't deal damage, it makes sense that these moves are missing power values. Using code similar to that above, it might make sense to replace these NA's with 0's again. There are some moves shown that aren't status moves (guillotine, horn drill), and these are known as one-hit-KO moves. These moves knock out the opponent in one hit, and therefore have infinite power. Note that these moves are balanced by their terrible accuracy.

# Key Relationships Between Variables




